...cost for those displaced as a result of urban
renewal. Could you continue with that, please?
Under the university eminent domain
proceedings, apparently there would not have
been a relocation
cost that would enter into it. And by going the
urban renewal route, this meant that the people
would get payment for a relocation. And that was
one of the reasons that urban renewal was used. Can
you see areas of the city that were impacted by this
as a result of influx of those that were displaced
and let's say a demand on services that had not been
anticipated as a result of urban renewal programs
and had to be planned for? I don't recall a specific
area that was impacted as a result. We did have
individuals who were displaced, and I think it was
very difficult for some of them to find comparable
property that they could afford. Now, some of the
areas in the university area, we had a number of
elderly widows. I don't know why, but this tends to
happen that way, who had converted their
residences to boarding houses and apartments,
and it was their primary livelihood. Now, a number
of them did not go into or continue that occupation
as they were displaced. In other words, other
arrangements were made, and that was
discontinued. So I do think that we affected
individuals, but I don't think that the
population was that so great that we had a mass
exodus or group that impacted any other section of
town to any extensive degree. Which sections of
Austin would you say people would mainly relocate
in as a result of their limited incomes? Well, in
the university area, I would say that a number of
the people would go into apartments. Some of them,
I'm sure, went to live with families.
I do know of some who just moved to, say, duplexes
and this sort of thing. The community development
program of the federal government, mid-1970s to
present, how has this affected planning in
Austin?
I don't think that I can answer that question
adequately today. The freeway era, especially
the interstate highway system of mid-1950s and
that had major impact in cities in changing
transportation routes, in many cities
increasing suburbanization and that. What
planning was involved to deal with the fallout
from this type of program in Austin? Well,
actually, we had tremendous advantage when
Interstate 35 was put in. We had East Avenue in that
general location, and it initially was about 200
feet wide. And so the initial construction on
Interstate was within that right of way. The later
construction, it was, as you know, that these
projects are almost out of date by the time that you
start implementing them because of population
growth and so on. So the northern section was built
with 200 feet of right-of-way. Then the
midsection, which was through the Bracken Ridge
area and on south, it was discovered that really
they needed more right-of-way, so more
right-of-way was acquired. But because of having
200 to begin with, it wasn't, you know, as bad as it
might have been. Then as the traffic need
increased, it was discovered that we could not
stay within that 200 feet. We needed extra area for
extra lanes. And at that time, the Highway
Department looked at the land cost versus
construction cost, and it was determined that
they would go with a double deck. because the land
costs apparently were higher than the
construction costs. So that's what resulted in
the double-deck of interstate. Now, of course, we
do have continued expansion north end and south
end on interstate and where the right-of-way can
be acquired for apparently less than the
double-decking. We're going with the surface,
more or less. As far as the urban area extending on
out as a result, or you might call it suburban, as a
result of the expressways, we've had really only
one expressway, and that's Interstate 35. We have
a number of other major arterioles, but most of
those are really overburdened, and they need to be
expressed ways. 183 is virtually a nightmare
because of all the development that we've had that
has gone on out. And Austin, contrary to some of the
things that you will find in the new comprehensive
plan where people state that they want to
establish
land development that would support a mass
transit system or bus system, whatever, anyway, a
type of mass transit.
Each time anybody comes in with a proposal for any
sort of high density, be it apartments, high rise,
anything of that sort, we have tremendous
opposition. from the abutting neighborhoods.
They do not want high density residential. They
feel as though that they want single family. And
even in areas, they don't want duplexes even. They
object to townhouses. In other words, single
family is what everybody seems to want. And
everybody can't afford it. But the people who are
already there, they say, we want to keep this the
way it is. And the people who are coming in, they
need housing. And we have a difficult situation.
And I'm not sure whether we have any good solution
for it, because there are times when you want mass
transit. You need higher intensity development
in order to support mass transit. The further out
you go, the more you have the need for the mass
transit, but if you have such low density, mass
transit can't support itself. So we have a
situation that I don't think has a good answer. How
did the location of Interstate 35 itself, its
position in the city, affect developmental
patterns as far as residences and businesses
went? Was there any kind of partitioning by income
groups, ethnic groups, or anything like that that
you can see as a result of Interstate 35? I don't
think it was as a result of Interstate 35. I feel as
though that we had the...
pattern already set before interstate ever came
in. East Austin has been predominantly minority
and West Austin and some minority in South Austin,
but it has generally been on the east side. And I
think part of the reason for this is that as the
transportation system changed from railroad to
other forms of transportation, the affluent
moved away from the East Austin area And this
housing then became available. It was a little
lower priced. And so I think the minorities tended
to move into that area. And it just developed this
way. A filtering process, you'd say. Yes.
What significant public development projects or
private development projects can you think of
have impacted planning in Austin? University of
Texas is a major industry. That has impacted
Austin tremendously in more ways than one. The
street system, because of the fact that they have
continued to expand, we continue to vacate
streets. In other words, they form kind of a big
barrier or block. in right north of the core area.
The taxing situation, it has affected that
because we have over 50% of the land within the city
of Austin is tax-exempt because it's either
university, state, church, federal, county. And
so this does affect Austin quite a bit. And its tax
base. And its tax base. The other things... We
have, of course, Bergstrom, which has impacted to
a degree. You don't stop and think about some of
these impacts as much when they've been here a long
time, because you have learned to integrate it
into the community, and you just don't really
think about the impact. Then, of course, we've had
industries that have come in. But until just
fairly recent years, we didn't have any major
industries here. We had the university, I think,
and the state capital were the two major
industries in Austin as far as employment was
concerned. That's another reason, of course, our
economy has been as stable as it has been because we
have not been dependent on the market as such as far
as goods are concerned. And that is changing
because we've had more industry here, but we have
what we would consider the higher quality
industries, the clean industries, and this is
what has been encouraged for Austin. And, of
course, one of the reasons for that is the
university. So we go back to the influence of the
university because a lot of the technological
industries like to move here because they have a
source of drawing from employees from the
university, which, of course, has benefited us.
What is the positioning of these so-called clean
industries in Austin? Are they fairly,
do they remain clustered in a particular area of
town? Can you characterize it in that sense? I
don't think we can do it. Quite in that way, we do
have several industries out northwest. They
wanted acreages. Most of the industries that have
come in have not wanted to move into the areas that
we had laid out basically for industry in the
original 1961 plan. Can you see reasons for that?
Yes. It's because as soon as people felt as though
their land was classified for industry, they
boosted the price. And they felt, here we have an
industrial price. So when the industries came in,
they started looking for other land that was not
classified for industry, and they could get it for
a lot less. And that's exactly what happened. And
you found that the industries, of course, would
move wherever they found land was the least
expensive. Transportation was not as important a
factor. Well, all of them have considered
transportation, too. All of them have not
considered terrain because one of the things that
in the 1961 plan, the industries that we had
established and some of them have followed
through in these areas very well. We had located
them where our terrain was fairly level, where we
had rail service, where we had major streets.
Those areas, a lot of them are developing for
industry, like we had anticipated. But we have had
a good bit of pressure on for industry in other
areas as well. How have state projects, new
construction, new state office buildings in the
capital area impacted planning in the city of
Austin by taking available land space, other than
the taxing problem?
Of course, in the 61 plan, we had anticipated that
the capital would expand all the way from 11th
Street to 19th Street. And we had worked with the
state at that time, and they did make plans on what
their expansion would be. One of the things that I
think has affected the community, and that is that
We do not have control over zoning control over
state buildings. And so heist limitations, that
sort of thing, they can do as they please. And we do,
or we have ended up with some buildings that have a
certain tendency to block the capital view. to a
degree, but of course we have private buildings
under the zoning jurisdiction that also do the
same. Have height restrictions been considered
in the area in order that the capital view may be
preserved? Oh yes, that is I think going to be one of
the upcoming major issues. We have had a number of
high-rise proposals within the past year, and
There's been more and more concern expressed by
various groups and citizens in regard to keeping
the visibility of the capital protected. It's a
very difficult situation because Austin is
hilly. There are some areas that maybe you could
have a fairly tall high rise that would not affect.
the line of vision from major parts of the city.
Then there are other areas that if you have
prominent locations, or as far as height would be
concerned, the relationship, even a fairly
low-rise building could block. So we are working
on this to a degree at the present time. It's going
to take some time to
develop the visual corridor plan. But again, that
is something that will be coming up. Has the land
that's been taken up by the state government as a
result of capital expansion and university
expansion resulted in a squeeze in land space that
is needed for commercial facilities and
residential facilities for the employees and the
influx of population that's resulted? I don't
think that it really has affected it in that way.
The downtown area, there's a lot of available land
I should not say land. There are a number of older
buildings that are not being used to capacity. We
have a number of areas that need to be revitalized
that are not being used to their full optimum. I
don't believe that the university and state
expansion has really affected the commercial
development. Now, you mentioned earlier that
it's only been in recent years that a number of
industries have been attracted to the area, and
most of them have been so-called light
industries. Have heavy industries ever played a
role in planning in Austin, or do you think they
might in the future?
We had one, and that was when Michelin, the entire
company, planned to come in with a plant. This was
when, pardon? about a year and a half to two years
ago. Not very long ago.
They had selected a site. Accessibility
was a little bit of a problem. However, the
development of the industry would not have
generated much more traffic than residential
development of the same site. But there was a fear
on the part of most of the surrounding
subdivisions, existing subdivisions, that it
would create tremendous environmental
problems. Whenever you think about a tire
company, you think about the worst part of the tire
company, the odors and everything. The Michelin
company was very, very secretive in their
proposal in the early stages. They did not come in
and do any groundwork as far as preparing
neighborhoods or meeting with neighborhoods.
They got information as far as availability of
utilities and, you know, a number of things,
technical questions had been asked. And we had
reviewed it in that sense without knowing what
sort of industry was being proposed. So when they
made the announcement, there was an immediate
negative response. attitude and feeling on the
part of the public. And even though they did fly a
number of people, including I think some of the
neighborhood leaders, to some of the plants that
functioned in a comparable way, and the feeling
was still so negative that they just dropped the
project. How have other major commercial
investments played a part in planning in Austin?
Major commercial or let's say residential
subdivisions or developments like that, how have
they played a part in planning in Austin?
I'm not exactly sure how to answer that. We have
some developers who are very, very large and they
develop Certain areas, they have a tendency to go
into areas that can be served easily, that are
lower in cost so that the housing ends up being
lower. They can develop for a lower price. And
one thing that we've had a problem on, and that is
that the new comprehensive plan established a
north-south growth corridor. In some of those
areas, the utilities are not there. The concept
was that the city would encourage the development
in these areas by participating by means of CIP in
bringing services to the area and so on. The other
areas, the growth areas that were supposed to be
protected and discouraged, we were not to deny the
development of those areas, but we were not to
participate and provide any funding for these
other areas. Unfortunately,
some of the areas that are in the more sensitive
environmentally
situated locations are the ones that are very
desirable for housing. They have the views. In
other words, Some of them are in the more affluent
areas. It costs more to develop, but that's where a
lot of people want to live. And those are the most
environmentally sensitive at the same time.
That's right, and that's where the people would
like to live. And so we have pressures on because
the developers are responding to the market, and
the market is there, and so they want to develop
those areas. Can you think of specific
development projects that were large enough in
scale that, in and of themselves, they had a
significant impact on planning as a result of
transportation, utility needs, or expansion?
Are you talking about housing or industry or both?
Well, both, I would imagine, especially
residential, let's say. Residential? Well,
we've had some, well, just like in that 183
corridor. We've had a series of subdivisions that
have moved into that area. And part of it is a result
of Texas Instruments going in and IBM in the
Northwest sector. And so housing wants to be a
little bit closer to places of employment. So they
kind of go together a little bit, and so we've had a
lot of pressure on that area, and of course it
affects the street system. Well, I'm not going to
say it's overloaded, but it's over text, and with
the speeds that people travel, whether they're
within the speed limit or not, we've ended up with a
fairly dangerous situation. We have a number of
subdivisions that have gone into various areas
where the streets are not really up to standard
that might create problems as the subdivision
developed because with the capital improvement
program needs for some of these streets, just like
our last bond election didn't make it, so we did not
have the funding for upgrading of some of the
facilities that needed to be upgraded. So we are
ending up with some developments that are on
streets that are not really adequate. And not
designed for that kind of capacity. I mean, the
plans were there in relation to the arterial
system, but the timing had not been reached
because of either the capital improvements
program or the bond election not making it or the
fact that there is always a time lag
What significant changes in the city charter have
impacted the administration of planning in
Austin? There haven't been any major changes that
would have impacted us, in my opinion. Are there
any charter changes that would have
significantly impacted plan implementation?
Different types of zoning allowed? Well, not, I
don't think, within the charter. Now, I think, I'm
trying to remember what proposals came up there
have been some discussions on modifying the
charter and I think that with if we end up having
area planning And if that should go through sector
planning, that would impact our department
tremendously, because we would not have the staff
to function in this way. Could you briefly
describe on what basis these sectors would be
delineated in that? Well, this is the other
problem on exactly what boundaries would be
established. But I'm assuming that it would be
established based on physical barriers. And
I don't think that we have the definition, say, for
neighborhood, even though a lot of people call
themselves a neighborhood group. We don't have
the traditional definition of a neighborhood
anymore. What is a neighborhood? I can't answer
you anymore. We used to use long ago, really the
service area of, say, an elementary school. But
with all our cross busing, that's gone out the
window. We do have some areas that are physically
separated by creeks, by major thoroughfares, by a
major public holding of land. There are various
things like that that might establish an area or a
neighborhood But when we talk about either sector
planning or neighborhood planning,
I think that our definition is a little bit loose.
And the areas would have to be set up. It could be set
up, say, almost in quadrants for the city, in four
quadrants. But on what line we would use, whether
we would use, say, Lake Austin and Town Lake as one
of the major boundaries, I'm sure that we would
because I think it would be a logical one.
Interstate 35 would be another fairly good
barrier because... We do not have as much
neighborhood association
across those major barriers. What
administrative changes within the planning
department can you see since you've been working
here? have impacted planning for Austin in its
history?
Well, of course, the planning department was once
a part of Public Works. It separated off. Do you
know about when it was that it separated off? I
think that it was in the late 40s, or 48, 50, right in
through there.
The fact that our Planning Commission makeup has
changed the way that we function has changed a
little. We have realigned as the needs came up
within the department because we
have changed from just one department and
developed into sections. The sections have
changed because we used to have an engineering
section that was dropped out and actually the
engineering section covered the drafting and the
drafting ended up under current planning. So we
have realigned depending on the needs of the
community. How have changes in directorship of
the planning department itself over the years
changed the personality or changed the
operations of the planning department? I don't
think there has been too great a change. We've had,
I think, very dedicated directors who are
dedicated to the community, to the keeping the
community environmentally
Well, clean. We have concern for existing
neighborhoods, residences. This is one thing
that has been consistent throughout.
I think it's really been fairly consistent now
because of the implementation of the various
plans under different directors. There's been
some transitional change, but I think that
under our current director, there has been, I
would say, the encouragement of public
involvement. getting everybody to become
involved, to participate in the planning
process. And I think that this has happened under
the current director, primarily. What
contributions can you see that were made by past
directors, those preceding Mr. Lilly?
Well, we haven't had very many directors. In fact,
I think the first director was very, very involved
in the development of Town Lake. What was his name?
I wish you hadn't asked me that at this point. I'll
give it to you now. To the best of your recollection
then, who was the first planning director with the
department here? I believe the first one was Bill
Parker. And that was before you were employed
here? Yes. from seeing his contributions to the
department and what he had left with the
department. Can you see that his style of
administration in the department impacted
planning changes in comparison to his successor?
I don't think that anymore, because I think that he
was a dedicated planner. And he wanted the best for
the community. He had a strong interest in the
improvement and development of the... Actually,
it was Colorado River at that time because we
didn't have the lake, Town Lake, but all the
riverfront. And it wasn't until recently that we
had...